# Update certificates

How your TLS certificates are updated depends on how they were created:

* Certificates generated by the Operator are long-term. If you need to update them, you must provide new certificates to the Operator. Jump to the sections below for the steps.

* Certificates issued by the cert-manager are short-term. They are valid for 3 months. The cert-manager automatically reissues the certificates on schedule and without downtime.

* Certificates manually generated by you are not renewed automatically. It is your responsibility to timely update them. Use the steps in the following sections for how to do it.

This document describes how to update the internal certificates. Use the same steps to update external certificates. Read more about internal and external certificates in the [About TLS](TLS.md) section.

## Before you start

Export the namespace where your cluster is deployed as an environment variable:

```bash
export NAMESPACE=<my-namespace>
```

## Check your certificates for expiration

=== "With cert-manager"

    If you [use cert-manager](tls-cert-manager.md) to generate certificates, do the following.

    1. Check the necessary secrets names (`cluster1-ssl` and
        `cluster1-ssl-internal` by default):

        ```bash
        kubectl get certificate -n $NAMESPACE
        ```

        ??? example "Expected output"

            ``` {.text .no-copy}
            NAME                    READY   SECRET                  AGE
            cluster1-ca-cert        True    cluster1-ca-cert        49m
            cluster1-ssl            True    cluster1-ssl            49m
            cluster1-ssl-internal   True    cluster1-ssl-internal   49m
            ```

    2. Optionally you can also check that the certificates issuer is up and running:

        ```bash
        kubectl get issuer -n $NAMESPACE
        ```

        ??? example "Expected output"

            ``` {.text .no-copy}
            NAME                     READY   AGE
            cluster1-pxc-ca-issuer   True    49m
            cluster1-pxc-issuer      True    49m
            ```
    3. Use the following command to find out the certificates validity dates,
    substituting Secret names if necessary:

        ```bash
        {
          kubectl -n $NAMESPACE get secret/cluster1-ssl-internal -o jsonpath='{.data.tls\.crt'} | base64 --decode | openssl x509 -inform pem -noout -text | grep -E "Not Before|Not After"
          kubectl -n $NAMESPACE get secret/cluster1-ssl -o jsonpath='{.data.ca\.crt}' | base64 --decode | openssl x509 -inform pem -noout -text | grep -E "Not Before|Not After"
          }
        ```

        ??? example "Sample output"
    
            ```{.text .no-copy}
            notBefore=Nov  7 10:54:00 2025 GMT
            notAfter=Nov  7 10:54:00 2026 GMT
            ```

=== "Operator-generated or manual TLS certificates"

    If the Operator created TLS certificates or you created them yourself, do the following.

    1. List Secrets in your namespace and note the names used for external and internal TLS. By default these are `cluster1-ssl` and `cluster1-ssl-internal`. Otherwise the Secret names match the values of the `sslSecretName` and `sslInternalSecretName` options in your cluster Custom Resource.

        ```bash
        kubectl get secrets -n $NAMESPACE
        ```

    2. Optionally, confirm that both TLS Secrets exist and are of type `kubernetes.io/tls`:

        ```bash
        kubectl get secrets -n $NAMESPACE -o custom-columns=NAME:.metadata.name,TYPE:.type | grep -E 'NAME|ssl'
        ```

        Adjust the filter or Secret names to match your cluster.

    3. Use the following command to find out the certificates validity dates,
    substituting Secret names if necessary:

        ```bash
        {
          kubectl -n $NAMESPACE get secret/cluster1-ssl-internal -o jsonpath='{.data.tls\.crt}' | base64 --decode | openssl x509 -inform pem -noout -text | grep -E "Not Before|Not After"
          kubectl -n $NAMESPACE get secret/cluster1-ssl -o jsonpath='{.data.ca\.crt}' | base64 --decode | openssl x509 -inform pem -noout -text | grep -E "Not Before|Not After"
        }
        ```

        ??? example "Sample output"
    
            ```{.text .no-copy}
            Not Before=Nov  7 10:44:00 2025 GMT
            Not After=Nov  7 10:44:00 2026 GMT
            Not Before=Nov  7 10:54:00 2025 GMT
            Not After=Nov  7 10:54:00 2026 GMT
            ```

### Update valid certificates without downtime

This section explains how to update your certificates that are still valid, without downtime. For already expired certificates, refer to [Update expired certificates](#update-expired-certificates-with-downtime) section.

**When to use this method:**

- Your certificates were generated by the Operator, but *not* using cert-manager
- You generated the certificates manually or provided pre-existing certificates

To roll out new certificates (both CA and TLS) with the Operator, follow these steps.

1. Generate a new CA certificate (`ca.pem`), a new TLS certificate (`server.pem`) and a key for it (`server-key.pem`). Refer to the [Generate certificates manually](tls-manual.md) tutorial for the steps.
 
2. Create a Secret object and provide the new certificates within it. The Secret name must be in the format `<existing-secret>-new`. 
   
   For example, if the existing Secret name is `cluster1-ssl-internal`, the new Secret name is `cluster1-ssl-internal-new`. 
   
   In the following command:

    * `ca.pem` is added to the Secret as `ca.crt`
    * `server.pem` is added to the Secret as `tls.crt`
    * `server-key.pem` is added to the Secret as `tls.key`

    ```bash
    kubectl -n $NAMESPACE create secret generic cluster1-ssl-internal-new \
    --from-file=ca.crt=ca.pem \
    --from-file=tls.crt=server.pem \
    --from-file=tls.key=server-key.pem
    ```

On the next reconcile, the Operator detects the Secret and automatically updates the certificates. This triggers the rolling restart of the database Pods.

??? note "What happens under the hood"

    When the Operator reconciles the cluster and detects the Secret with the new TLS certificates, it does the following:

    * Combines a new and current CA certificates into a single file
    * Updates the current Secret to first append the combined CA certificate and then replace the TLS server and key certificates with new ones 
    * Drops the old CA certificate leaving only the new one
  
    On every step, the Operator performs the rolling restart of the database Pods to ensure the cluster availability and inter-node communication during the update. 


### Update expired certificates with downtime

This section explains how to update the certificates that have already expired. To check certificate validity, see [Check your certificates for expiration](#check-your-certificates-for-expiration).

If your certificates have been already expired, follow the *pause - update Secrets - unpause* procedure below:

1. [Pause the cluster](pause.md), and make sure it has reached its paused state.

2. If cert-manager is used, delete issuer and TLS certificates:

    ```bash
    {
      kubectl delete issuer/cluster1-pxc-ca
      kubectl delete certificate/cluster1-ssl certificate/cluster1-ssl-internal
      }
    ```

3. Delete Secrets to force the SSL reconciliation:

    ```bash
    kubectl -n $NAMESPACE delete secret/cluster1-ssl secret/cluster1-ssl-internal
    ```

4. Check certificates to make sure reconciliation have succeeded.

5. Unpause the cluster [in a standard way](pause.md), and make
    sure it has reached its running state.

### Keep certificates after deleting the cluster

In case of cluster deletion, objects, created for SSL (Secret, certificate, and
issuer) are not deleted by default.

If the user wants the cleanup of objects created for SSL, there is a [finalizers.delete-ssl](operator.md#finalizers-delete-ssl)
option in `deploy/cr.yaml`: if this finalizer is set, the Operator will delete
Secret, certificate and issuer after the cluster deletion event.
